.TH MIA "1" "September 2009" "mia" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
MIA \fB\-\-\fR Mapping Iterativ Assembler
.IP
A tool for creating short read assemblies.
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
mia [\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fB\-f\fR \fIfragment reads\fR \fB\-r\fR \fIreference sequence\fR [\fB\-s\fR \fIsubstitution matrix\fR]
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-r\fR \fIreference sequence\fR
initial reference sequence in fasta format
.TP
\fB\-f\fR \fIfragment reads\fR
fasta or fastq file of fragments to align
.TP
\fB\-s\fR \fIsubstitution matrix\fR
substitution matrix file used for scoring (\fBdefault\fR: \fIflat matrix\fR)
.TP
\fB\-m\fR \fINAME\fR
use \fINAME\fR as root file name for maln output file(s) (\fBdefault\fR: \fIassembly.maln.iter\fR)
.SS "FILTER parameters:"
.PP
A set of filters that can be applied to the reads. 
.TP
\fB\-u\fR 
fasta database has repeat sequences, keep one based on alignment score
.TP
\fB\-U\fR 
fasta database has repeat sequences, keep one based on sum of q\-scores
.TP
\fB\-C\fR 
collapse sequences with same start, end, strand info into a single sequence
.TP
\fB\-A\fR 
use adapter presence and coordinate information to more aggressively remove repeat sequences \- suitable only for 454 sequences that have not
already been adapter trimmed
.TP
\fB\-T\fR 
fasta database has adapters, trim these (need option \fB\-a\fR)
.TP
\fB\-a\fR \fI<adapter sequence or code>\fR
If \fB\-T\fR is specified, mia will attempt to find and trim adapters on each sequence. The adapter sequence itself can be specified by a one letter code as argument to \fB\-a\fR. 

    \fBN\fR or \fBn\fR 	                 => Neandertal adapter
    any other single letter     => Standard GS FLX adapter
    sequence (less than 127 nt) => user-specified adapter

.TP
\fB\-k\fR \fILENGTH\fR
use kmer filter with kmers of this \fIlength\fR. The kmer filter requires that a sequence fragment have at least one kmer of the specified length in common with the reference sequence in order to align it. For 36nt Solexa data, a value of \fB12\fR works well.
.TP
\fB\-I\fR \fIFILE\FR
filename of list of sequence IDs to use, ignoring all others
.SS "ALIGNMENT parameters:"
.TP
\fB\-p\fR \fI<consensus calling code>\fR
The \fB\-p\fR option specifies how the new consensus assembly sequence is called at each iteration (\fBdefault\fR: \fB1\fR)
.PD 0
.RS
.TP
\fB1\fR => 
Any base whose aggregate score is \fBMIN_SC_DIFF_CONS\fR better than all thers is the assembly base. If none is, then N is the assembly base.
.TP
\fB2\fR => 
The best scoring base whose aggregate score is better than \fBMIN_SCORE_CONS\fR is the assembly base. If none is, then N is the assembly base.
.PD
.RE  
.TP
\fB\-c\fR 
means reference/assembly is circular
.TP
\fB\-i\fR 
iterate assembly until convergence
.TP
\fB\-F\fR 
only output the FINAL assembly, not each iteration
.TP
\fB\-D\fR 
reference sequence is only distantly related. Low scoring reads will NOT be removed after each iteration
.TP
\fB\-h\fR 
give special discount for homopolymer gaps. Useful when using 454 sequencing data
.TP
\fB\-M\fR 
use lower\-case soft\-masking of kmers
.TP
\fB\-H\fR \fISCORE\fR
do not use dynamic score cutoff, instead use this hard \fIscore\fR cutoff
.TP
\fB\-S\fR \fISLOPE\fR
\fIslope\fR of length/score cutoff line
.TP
\fB\-N\fR \fIINTERCEPT\fR
\fIintercept\fR of length/score cutoff line

.PP
The procedure for removing bad\-scoring alignments from the assembly is:
.IP
\fBDefault\fR: fit a line to length versus score and remove reads that are less that \fBSCORE_CUTOFF_BUFFER\fR than the average score for its length.
.IP
If \fB\-H\fR is specified then this hard score cutoff is applied to all reads. This is preferable if all reads are the same length.
.IP
If \fB\-S\fR or \fB\-N\fR are specified, then these are used as the slope and intercept of a length/score line. Reads must score above this line to be included. If only one of \fB\-S\fR or \fB\-N\fR is specified then the default values are used for the other (\fBdefault S = 200.0; default N = 0.0\fR)

.SH FILES 
.SS Substitution Matrices
.PP 
The substitution matrices are by default installed in the directory  
.B $PREFIX/share/mia/matrices
but you can also write your own. The matrices are:
.IP
\fIancient.submat.txt\fR is designed for ancient DNA and Roche \fB454\fR sequencing data.
.IP
\fIancient.submat.solexa.onepass.txt\fR takes an increased rate of G/T and C/A mismatches at the end of \fBIllumina\fR reads into account.
.IP
\fIancient.submat.solexa.pe.txt\fR like above but for \fBpaired end\fR reads.

.B
if no matrix is supplied an generic flat matrix with this parameters will be used:
.IP
MATCH=200, MISMATCH=\-600, N=\-100 for all positions

.SS Default ParameterS
.PP 
All default parameters, like \fBSCORE_CUTOFF_BUFFER\fR or \fBMIN_SCORE_CONS\fR can be changed by modifying the source file \fIparams.h\fR in the mia source directory and afterwards recompiling. 

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
MIA assembles the \fIfragment reads\fR to a single consensus sequence using the \fIreference sequence\fR as guidance.

.SH "AUTHOR"
Written by Ed Green and Michael Siebauer. 

.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <green@eva.mpg.de>.


.SH "COPYRIGHT"
Copyright © 2008 Ed Green  Michael Siebauer.
License Perl Artistic License 2.0 <http://www.perlfoundation.org/artistic_license_2_0>. 
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.  There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.


.SH "SEE ALSO"
ma (1)